# 5.1  Compositions

## A Web of Association

As mentioned [earlier](../chapter-4-reacting-with-behaviors/4.1-revisiting-hello-world.md#the-concept-of-behavior), contexts bound to the same behavior instance form a relationship. They become associated with one another and indirectly with the other related contexts of each other. Considering this with respect to the logging feature that was implemented throughout the last chapter, it can be said that `App Settings` is associated with `Console Log Route` which is associated with, however briefly, any qualifying `Log Message` contexts before they are deactivated. If there were a `File Log Route` with similar relationships as `Console Log Route`, then it would also be associated with `App Settings` and its qualifying `Log Message` contexts, but not directly associated with `Console Log Route`.

A visualization of these relationships might look something like:

\[Add a graphic depicting the context relationships.]

The associations between contexts form something like a web of app functionality. The web would grow and shrink as the application runs; some contexts may change their direct associates as the result of qualifying for different behaviors, while others may be added or removed. Since contexts bound to a behavior are persisted in memory, the full scope of this web not only shows the relationships of the app's contexts, but also what data is defining the [allocated memory footprint](#user-content-fn-1)[^1] of the application.

One or more of the contexts from this web define a "Composition". The following visualizations all depict compositions for the aforementioned web:

\[A series of graphics depicting the various compositions.]

The purpose of compositions is to group contexts together for [activation](../chapter-4-reacting-with-behaviors/4.2-from-when-to-whenever.md#activating-together), deactivation, or potential [behavior-defined evaluation](5.1-compositions.md#behavior-defined-evaluation). They can be part of a normal evaluation, so as to be inputs to any operation.



## Building a Composition

To better discuss how compositions work, consider a common video game scenario where the following contexts [are defined](#user-content-fn-2)[^2]:

* `Character ID` - Identifies a game character.
* `Health` - Defines an amount of health that specifies whether a game element should continue to exist. When associated with a `Character ID`, through a behavior, it will enforce whether the identified character is alive or dead.
* `Armor` - Specifies some amount of protection to reduce incoming damage, thus preserving character health during an attack.
* `Attack` - Defines an attack from one character to another, including the strength and type of the attack.

Building a composition requires at least one context instance. For this scenario, the context instance would most likely be a `Character ID`, as its purpose is to be easily [passed around](#user-content-fn-3)[^3] for any operations that need to enact some change related to that character. With a `Character ID`, a composition can be built, like so:

```
Initiate Attack :: 
    initiates an Attack upon a target, identified by a Character ID: 
        <attack, target id>?
            target: {target id};
            `Initiate the attack`.
```

In the above example, a new composition called `target` has been created. The syntax shown is a short-form for an alternative syntax, which would look like `target: Composition [target id];`. It consists only of the `target id` context instance. If the operation had the `Health` context as well then the composition could have been made as follows:

```
Initiate Attack :: 
    initiates an Attack upon a target, identified by a Character ID with Health: 
        <attack, target id, health>?
            character: {target id, health};
            `Initiate the attack`.
```

These compositions are composed directly from the instances known to the operation. This has been seen [before](../chapter-4-reacting-with-behaviors/4.2-from-when-to-whenever.md#activating-together), with the in-line composition declaration for an activation. The alternative more explicit syntax would be `target: Composition [target id, health];`.

### Composition Expansion

The former example is more likely to be the implementation, where this specific operation only requires the attack and its target. The operation that actually handles the attack to reduce the health of the target would probably be in a behavior that creates the association between the `Character ID` and the `Health`.  However, the same composition of the latter can still be built in the former, just from that `Character ID` instance. This can be accomplished through the composition expansion operator, `#`, like so:

```
Initiate Attack :: 
    initiates an Attack upon a target, identified by a Character ID: 
        <attack, target id>?
            target: {target id};
            target is target # Health,
            `Initiate the attack`.
```

The `target` composition is now expanded with any `Health` contexts that the `target id` is associated with through their bound behaviors. Composition expansion basically walks on the web of association one step outwards from the contexts of an existing composition[^4] to grow the composition by any contexts of the [specified type](#user-content-fn-5)[^5] that it finds. To expand the `target` composition to include `Armor`, the example could use the line `target is target # Health # Armor,` instead of `target is target # Health`, or `target is target # (Health, Armor)`. There is a slight difference, in that the former will expand the already expanded composition (`target` and any `Health` contexts) and the latter will only expand the original `target` composition.

The example can be updated to take advantage of any contexts being implicitly cast to a composition:

```
Initiate Attack :: 
    initiates an Attack upon a target, identified by a Character ID: 
        <attack, target id>?
            target: target id # Health,
            `Initiate the attack`.
```

Now `target id` is implicitly cast to a composition, and the expanded by any associated `Health` contexts to form the `target` composition.

### Composition Reduction

The (mostly) opposite of composition expansion is composition reduction, performed by `!#`, where a composition is reduced by excluding any contexts of a specified type (or types). This doesn't walk back from the outer edges of the composition within the web of assembly, so much as it just excludes the contexts of the specified type, no matter where they are in the composition's subset of the web.

Given the `target` in the above example, adding `health only: target !# Character ID;` would declare a new composition, `health only`, that is composed only of any `Health` contexts that were associated with the `target id`.

### Composition Replacement

The process of expanding a composition just to reduce it to the contexts it was just expanded can be fairly common. To accommodate this more clearly, Rede provides the replacement operator `<#`, so the `health only` composition could have been defined directly as `health only: target id <# Health;`.



## Composition Types

The examples so far have only shown dynamic compositions. These are compositions that can be composed of any number of contexts, as only determined at the time that the compositions are formed. These are very useful, but it can also be useful to have an explicit shape expected for a composition, as can be defined by a composition type.

These types are declared similarly to contexts, outside of any operation. This example gives form to what a `Character` composition may be:

```
Character: {Character ID, Health, Armor}.
```

If a `Character` were expected to have two associated `Armor` contexts, then the composition may look like the following instead:

```
Character: {Character ID, Health, Armor, Armor}.
```

More likely, it may be possible for a `Character` to have any number of [different types](#user-content-fn-6)[^6] of `Armor`, so the composition may account for that by including a bucket of `Armor`:

```
Character: {Character ID, Health, {*Armor*}}.
```

Just like other types, composition types can be useful to restrict what kind of compositions an operation may accept. They can also be used with the composition fulfillment operator `>#`. This operator will attempt to expand a composition until it fulfills a specific composition type. If it can't, then it returns back the closest it [could get](#user-content-fn-7)[^7].

This composition type and operator enables the example to be abstracted from the specific contexts that define a `Character`:

```
Initiate Attack :: 
    initiates an Attack upon a target, identified by a Character ID: 
        <attack, target id>?
            target: target id ># Character,
            `Initiate the attack`.
```

If the operation were to have instances for all parts of a composition type, then it could declare it directly with `target: Character {target id, health, armor}`, though that isn't a common case.



## Elements of a Composition

\[Describe how any retrieved element of a composition is a composition and how nested compositions work.]



## Behavior-Defined Evaluation

\[Describe how behavior operations can be evaluated with compositions.]

[^1]: This would be less than the total memory usage of the application at any given time though, since operations that are currently running would likely have local data that is in memory for performing logic and the runtime would require some memory as well to manage the contexts themselves.

[^2]: These contexts and their behaviors don't need to be detailed here, as the examples are only working with the concept of the contexts and aren't interesting in what they are actually doing.

[^3]: Or serialized/deserialized with network messages for a multiplayer game.

[^4]: The composition containing `target id` in this case.

[^5]: Any `Health` contexts for this example.

[^6]: Although, perhaps there is not just an `Armor` for a game, there may be specific armor types or locations, such as `Chest Armor` or `Helmet`, but this example will assume a simple abstraction of `Armor` that could include any number of protection layers for the character.

[^7]: The actual return type of this operator is always a dynamic composition. It can't be reliably used to declare a variable of a composition type, but considering how compositions themselves are used dynamically, this isn't a concern.
