# 7.1  Final Thoughts

Contextual Programming is a new paradigm, focused on defining code through 'when' instead of 'how' or 'what'. It may not offer entirely unique ideas and it may be imperfect, either for its new and relatively untested philosophies or for specific scenarios, but hopefully this book has given you enough knowledge about it to have some ideas and new perspective.

Personally, I am excited to see how these ideas can change software development. The seeds for Contextual Programming started around 2014 when some concepts in Object-Oriented Programming didn't seem sufficient for what I was doing. Through learning and exploring other paradigms over the years, I found concepts that could help in some ways, but they weren't getting at the core of the issues I was seeing. By shifting my mindset to a perspective of 'when', I could see a path to achieving the highly dynamic systems I was looking for.

The result of that search has culminated in Contextual Programming and the desire to see it well expressed and tangible (in software) led to the creation of Rede. I plan to continue to explore the possibilities of Contextual Programming, perhaps to finally see a day when code for more dynamic software can be developed in a more maintainable and scalable manner, with the resulting product being able to reach new heights in user interaction, adaptability, and simulation. I hope that this book has inspired you, either to [contribute](7.2-additional-resources.md#for-contributing), to [join us (or follow along)](7.2-additional-resources.md#for-community), or to [delve deeper](7.2-additional-resources.md#for-learning) into these concepts and apply what you have learned.

Above anything else, please keep these concepts in mind as you travel along your own journey in software development. Share them (or this book) with others that may find them interesting and use them in your own projects or thought experiments for what programming could be. Doing so gives purpose to these ideas and can lead to even better ideas and outcomes.

This book may be updated for changes to the paradigm or to Rede, which is itself an experimental language and is very likely to change, at least in the near future.&#x20;
